[DOCS-9557] adding storage monitoring doc (#26377)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/integrations/guide/storage-monitoring-setup.md

---
title: Storage Monitoring [Preview]
private: true
---

Storage Monitoring provides deep, prefix-level analytics to help you understand exactly how your storage is being used, detect potential issues before they impact operations, and make data-driven decisions about storage optimization. Whether you're tracking storage growth, investigating access patterns, or optimizing costs, Storage Monitoring gives you the insights you need to manage your storage infrastructure efficiently.

This guide explains how to configure Storage Monitoring in Datadog for your S3 buckets. You can set this up either manually or using our provided CloudFormation templates. Please note that Storage Monitoring is currently in Preview and is available under Resource Catalog -> Monitoring -> S3 Buckets.

## Setup

### Installation

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "CloudFormation" %}}

The fastest way to set up Storage Monitoring is using our provided CloudFormation templates. This process involves two steps:

#### Step 1: Configure Inventory Generation

This template configures your existing S3 bucket to generate inventory reports, which Datadog will use to generate detailed metrics about your prefixes.

> 1. Download the source-bucket-inventory-cfn.yaml template

Author: Added the link in a new commit

1. Download the cloud-inventory-policies-cfn.yaml template
2. Create a new stack With New Resources (standard)
3. Fill in the required parameters:
   - **DatadogIntegrationRole**: Your Datadog AWS integration role name
   - **DestinationBucketName**: The name of the bucket that will be the recipient for your inventory files
   - **SourceBucketName**: The name of the bucket for which you wish to start generating inventory files

   Optional parameters:
    - **DestinationBucketPrefix**:  If you want to reuse an existing bucket as the destination, this parameter allows the inventory files to be shipped to a specific prefix in that bucket. Please don’t include trailing slashes ( “/“ ). Can be left blank.
   - **SourceBucketPrefix**: This parameter limits the inventory generation to a specific prefix in the source bucket. Can be left blank.

{{< img src="integrations/guide/bucket_policy_stack_details.png" alt="Stack parameters for bucket policy" responsive="true" style="width:60%;" >}}

4. Verify parameters and launch stack

> {{< img src="integrations/guide/acknowledge_bucket_policy.png" alt="Verify and launch stack" responsive="true" style="width:60%;" >}}

Author: The screenshot was partial view of the screen. I actually removed the screenshot because the bullet explains it pretty well.

#### Post-Setup Steps

> After completing the CloudFormation setup, reach out with the following information:

Author: We're working on creating an email handle but putting in my email in here until that's ready!

    4. AWS Region of the destination bucket holding the inventory files
    5. AWS account ID in which the buckets live
    6. Datadog Org ID

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "AWS Console" %}}

If you prefer to set up the required [AWS Inventory](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/configure-inventory.html) and related configuration manually, follow these steps:

#### Step 1: Create Destination Bucket

Create a new S3 bucket that will store your inventory files. This bucket will act as the central location for inventory reports. Required: Please create a prefix within the destination bucket.

#### Step 2: Configure Bucket and Integration Role Policies

Add a bucket policy to your destination bucket allowing write access i.e. s3:PutObject from your source buckets [See AWS doc]. The policy should include permissions for the source buckets to write inventory files.

Ensure your Datadog AWS integration role has s3:GetObject and s3:ListObjects permissions on the destination bucket. These permissions allow Datadog to read the generated inventory files.

#### Step 3: Configure Inventory Generation

For each bucket you want to monitor:

>   1. Go to the AWS S3 Console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Go to the [Amazon S3 buckets page][5] in the AWS console, and select the bucket.
```

>   2. Navigate to the bucket's Management tab

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Navigate to the bucket's **Management** tab.
```

>   3. Click Create Inventory Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. Click **Create inventory configuration**.
```

  4. Configure the following settings:
    - Set a configuration name
    - (Optional) Specify a source bucket prefix
    - We also advise picking “Current Versions Only”

>     - In select destination bucket, pick the newly created destination bucket. Example, if bucket is named destination-bucket `s3://your-destination-bucket`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Destination**: select the destination bucket. For example, if the bucket is named `destination-bucket`, enter `s3://your-destination-bucket`.
```

>     - If you wish to have a prefix on the destination bucket, please define it and let us know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       **Note**: If you want to use a prefix on the destination bucket, add this as well  
```

>     - Choose frequency: Daily (recommended) or Weekly [Note that this setting determines how often your prefix level metrics will be updated in Datadog]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Frequency**: Datadog recommends choosing **Daily**. This setting determines how often your prefix-level metrics are updated in Datadog  
```

>     - Format: CSV

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Output format**: CSV  
```

    - Enable inventory generation
    - Do not specify encryption

>     - Select required metadata fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Select the following **Additional metadata fields**:  
```

          - Size
          - Last Modified
          - Storage Class

#### Post-Setup Steps

> After the above steps, please reach out on #storage-monitoring with the following information:
> 
> 1. Name of the destination bucket where inventories are stored
> 2. Prefix where the inventory files will be stored
> 2. Region of the destination bucket
> 3. AWS Account ID in which the bucket is defined
> 4. Datadog Role Name that has the permissions to read objects in destination bucket
> 4. Datadog Org ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After completing the above steps, reach out on the `#storage-monitoring` Slack channel with the following information:

1. Name of the destination bucket where inventories are stored.
2. Prefix to store the inventory files.
3. Region of the destination bucket.
4. AWS account ID containing the bucket.
5. Datadog role name that has the permissions to read objects in destination bucket.
6. Datadog org ID.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Verification

To verify your setup:
Wait for the first inventory report to generate (up to 24 hours for daily inventories)
Check the destination bucket for inventory files
Confirm the Datadog integration can access the files:
Check Resource Catalog -> Monitoring -> S3 Buckets -> Installation Recommendations to see if the bucket you configured is showing in the list

### Cost Considerations
- S3 Inventory pricing: $0.0025 per million objects listed
- Standard S3 egress costs apply when syncing inventory files

### Support
If you encounter any issues or need assistance:
- Verify all permissions are correctly configured

> - Contact us at mahashree.rajendran@datadoghq.com with your bucket details, AWS account ID and Datadog Org ID

Reviewer: Please correct me if I'm wrong, but I think Datadog org ID isn't something that's readily available -- as far as I know, a user has to send a request to [this API endpoint](https://docs.datadoghq.com/api/latest/users/#get-user-details) and get the org ID from the returned data. Unless you're aware of another way for users to find their org ID, this is something we should probably provide guidance for

    - **Frequency**: Datadog recommends choosing **Daily**. This setting determines how often your prefix-level metrics are updated in Datadog
    - **Output format**: CSV
    - **Status**: Enabled
    - **Server-side encryption**: Don't specify an encryption key
    - Select the following **Additional metadata fields**:
          - Size
          - Last Modified
          - Storage Class'

    **Note:** Review [AWS S3 pricing][7] for costs related to inventory generation.

#### Post-setup steps

After completing the above steps, reach out on the `#storage-monitoring` Slack channel with the following information:

1. Name of the destination bucket where inventories are stored.
2. Prefix to store the inventory files.
3. Region of the destination bucket.
4. AWS account ID containing the bucket.
5. Datadog role name that has the permissions to read objects in destination bucket.
6. Datadog org ID.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Validation

To verify your setup:
   - Wait for the first inventory report to generate (up to 24 hours for daily inventories)
   - Check the destination bucket for inventory files
   - Confirm the Datadog integration can access the files:

>    - Navigate to **Infrastructure -> Resource Catalog -> Monitoring -> S3 Buckets -> Installation Recommendations** to see if the bucket you configured is showing in the list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - Navigate to **Infrastructure -> Resource Catalog -> Monitoring -> S3 Buckets -> Installation Recommendations** to see if the bucket you configured is showing in the list
```

**Note:** This CloudFormation template can be rolled back, but rolling back doesn't delete the created resources. This is to ensure the existing bucket doesn't get deleted. You can manually delete the inventory configurations by going on the **Management** tab in the bucket view.

**Note:** Review [Amazon S3 pricing][106] for costs related to inventory generation.
#### Step 2: Configure required permissions

This template creates two IAM policies:
  - A policy to allow Datadog to read inventory files from the destination bucket
  - A policy to allow your source bucket to write inventory files to the destination bucket

1. Download the [cloud-inventory-policies-cfn.yaml][103] template.
2. In [AWS CloudFormation][104], click **Create stack** in the top right corner and select **With new resources (standard)**.
3. In the **Specify template** step, select **Upload a template file**.
4. Click **Choose file** and select the `cloud-inventory-policies-cfn.yaml` file, then click **Next**.
5. Fill in the required parameters:
   - **DatadogIntegrationRole**: Your Datadog AWS integration role name

>    - **DestinationBucketName**: The name of the bucket that to receive your inventory files. **Note**: You must only use one destination bucket for all inventory files generated in an AWS account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - **DestinationBucketName**: The name of the bucket that receives your inventory files. **Note**: You must only use one destination bucket for all inventory files generated in an AWS account.
```

   - **SourceBucketName**: The name of the bucket you want to start generating inventory files for
   - **DestinationBucketPrefix**: If you want to reuse an existing bucket as the destination, this parameter allows the inventory files to be shipped to a specific prefix in that bucket. Ensure that any prefixes do not include trailing slashes (`/`)

   Optional parameters:
   - **SourceBucketPrefix**: This parameter limits the inventory generation to a specific prefix in the source bucket

{{< img src="integrations/guide/storage_monitoring/bucket_policy_stack_details.png" alt="Stack parameters for bucket policy" responsive="true" style="width:90%;" >}}

6. On the **Review and create** step, verify the parameters have been entered correctly, and click **Submit**.

#### Post-setup steps

After completing the CloudFormation setup, [reach out][105] with the following information:

>     1. Name of the destination bucket holding the inventory files.
>     2. Prefix where the files are stored in the destination bucket.
>     3. Name of the source bucket you want to monitor (the bucket producing inventory files).
>     4. AWS region of the destination bucket holding the inventory files.
>     5. AWS account ID containing the buckets.
>     6. Datadog org ID.

Reviewer 2: In the preview, this list isn't getting formatted correctly. Let's try removing the indentation and see if that fixes it.
```suggestion
1. Name of the destination bucket holding the inventory files.
2. Prefix where the files are stored in the destination bucket.
3. Name of the source bucket you want to monitor (the bucket producing inventory files).
4. AWS region of the destination bucket holding the inventory files.
5. AWS account ID containing the buckets.
6. Datadog org ID.
```

[101]: https://github.com/DataDog/experimental/blob/main/users/raphael.allier/source-bucket-inventory-cfn.yaml
[102]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/
[103]: https://github.com/DataDog/experimental/blob/main/users/raphael.allier/cloud-inventory-policies-cfn.yaml
[104]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/
[105]: mailto:storage-monitoring@datadoghq.com
[106]: https://aws.amazon.com/s3/pricing/
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "AWS Console" %}}

> To manually set up the required [Amazon S3 Inventory][2] and related configuration, follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: The link to Amazon S3 Inventory is broken in the preview.

#### Step 1: Create a destination bucket

1. [Create an S3 bucket][201] to store your inventory files. This bucket acts as the central location for inventory reports. **Note**: You must only use one destination bucket for all inventory files generated in an AWS account.
2. Create a prefix within the destination bucket.

#### Step 2: Configure the bucket and integration role policies

1. Follow the steps in the [Amazon S3 user guide][202] to add a bucket policy to your destination bucket allowing write access (`s3:PutObject`) from your source buckets.

2. Ensure the Datadog AWS integration role has `s3:GetObject` and `s3:ListObjects` permissions on the destination bucket. These permissions allow Datadog to read the generated inventory files.

#### Step 3: Configure Inventory generation

For each bucket you want to monitor:
  1. Go to the [Amazon S3 buckets page][203] in the AWS console, and select the bucket.
  2. Navigate to the bucket's **Management** tab.
  3. Click **Create inventory configuration**.

>   4. Configure the following settings:

Reviewer 2: This formatting is broken in the preview. To make a nested list, each level of nesting needs to be indented by 4 spaces. Here it looks like you may have indented it only 2 sapces.

    - Set a configuration name
    - (Optional) Specify a source bucket prefix
    - **Object versions**: Datadog recommends selecting **Current Versions Only**
    - **Destination**: Select the common destination bucket for inventory files in your AWS account. For example, if the bucket is named `destination-bucket`, enter `s3://your-destination-bucket`
       **Note**: If you want to use a prefix on the destination bucket, add this as well
    - **Frequency**: Datadog recommends choosing **Daily**. This setting determines how often your prefix-level metrics are updated in Datadog
    - **Output format**: CSV
    - **Status**: Enabled
    - **Server-side encryption**: Don't specify an encryption key
    - Select the following **Additional metadata fields**:
          1. Size
          2. Last Modified
          3. Storage Class

> **Note**: Review [AWS S3 pricing][204] for costs related to inventory generation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: Review [Amazon S3 pricing][204] for costs related to inventory generation.
```
